Editor revision 2021 03 23 (#205)
oasis-tcs/csaf: csaf_2.0/prose/csaf-v2-editor-draft.md

    specification
    vendor

The value `architecture` indicates the architecture for which the product is intended.

The value `host_name` indicates the host name of a system/service.

The value `language` indicates the language of the product.

> The value `legacy` indicates a nonspecific legacy entry.

Reviewer: Well, that is .. legacy 👀 cf. http://docs.oasis-open.org/csaf/csaf-cvrf/v1.2/cs01/csaf-cvrf-v1.2-cs01.html#_Toc493508801 - thanks for spotting. I am tempted to remove the term nonspecific but the sentence might feel naked afterwards ...

> The value `legacy` indicates a nonspecific legacy entry.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps: "indicates an entry that has reached its end of life"? Simply removing the word "nonspecific" would also be fine in my opinion :-)

> The value `legacy` indicates a nonspecific legacy entry.

Author: I think "any kind of"

Of the given five properties `cpe`, `hashes`, `purl`, `serial_numbers`, and `x_generic_uris`, one is mandatory.

    "product_identification_helper": {
      // ...
      "properties": { 
        "cpe": {
          // ...
        },
        "hashes": {
          // ...
        },
        "purl": {
          // ...
        },
        "serial_numbers": {
          // ...
        },
        "x_generic_uris": {
          // ...
        }
      }

##### 3.1.3.3.1 Full Product Name Type - Product Identification Helper - CPE

Common Platform Enumeration representation (`cpe`) of value type `string` of 5 or more characters with `pattern` (regular expression):

    ^(cpe:2\\.3:[aho\\*\\-](:(((\\?*|\\*?)([a-zA-Z0-9\\-\\._]|(\\\\[\\\\\\*\\?!\"#\\$%&'\\(\\)\\+,/:;<=>@\\[\\]\\^`\\{\\|\\}~]))+(\\?*|\\*?))|[\\*\\-])){5}(:(([a-zA-Z]{2,3}(-([a-zA-Z]{2}|[0-9]{3}))?)|[\\*\\-]))(:(((\\?*|\\*?)([a-zA-Z0-9\\-\\._]|(\\\\[\\\\\\*\\?!\"#\\$%&'\\(\\)\\+,/:;<=>@\\[\\]\\^`\\{\\|\\}~]))+(\\?*|\\*?))|[\\*\\-])){4})|([c][pP][eE]:/[AHOaho]?(:[A-Za-z0-9\\._\\-~%]*){0,6})$

> The Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) [CPE23-A] attribute refers to a method for naming platforms external to this specification.

Author: To be consistent with pURL:
```suggestion
The Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) attribute refers to a method for naming platforms external to this specification. See [CPE23-A] for details.
```

The default value for `algorithm` is `SHA-3`.

Examples:

    SHA-256
    SHA-384
    SHA-512
    SHA-3
    BLAKE3

The file representation (`file`) of type `string` with one or more characters contains the name of the file which is identified by the hash value.

Examples:

    WINWORD.EXE
    msotadddin.dll
    sudoers.so

The Value of the cryptographic hash representation (`value`) of value type `string` of 64 or more characters with `pattern` (regular expression):

    ^[0-9a-fA-F]{64,}$

The Value of the cryptographic hash attribute contains the cryptographic hash value in hexadecimal representation.

Examples:

    4775203615d9534a8bfca96a93dc8b461a489f69124a130d786b42204f3341cc
    9ea4c8200113d49d26505da0e02e2f49055dc078d1ad7a419b32e291c7afebbb84badfbd46dec42883bea0b2a1fa697c
    37df33cb7464da5c7f077f4d56a32bc84987ec1d85b234537c1c1a4d4fc8d09dc29e2e762cb5203677bf849a2855a0283710f1f5fe1d6ce8d5ac85c645d0fcb3

##### 3.1.3.3.3 Full Product Name Type - Product Identification Helper - PURL

The package URL (PURL) representation (`purl`) is a `string` of 4 or more characters with `pattern` (regular expression):

    ^pkg:

> This package URL (PURL) [PURL] attribute refers to a method for reliably identifying and locating software packages external to this specification.

Author: ```suggestion
This package URL (PURL) attribute refers to a method for reliably identifying and locating software packages external to this specification. See [PURL] for details.
```

Author: The same would apply for CPE (see line 676).

Document status (`status`) of value type `string` and `enum` defines the draft status of the document.
The value MUST be one of the following:

```
    draft
    final
    interim
```

The value `draft` indicates, that this is a pre-release, intended for issuing party’s internal use only, or possibly used externally when the party is seeking feedback or indicating its intentions regarding a specific issue.

The value `final` indicates, that the issuing party asserts the content is unlikely to change. “Final” status is an indication only, and does not preclude updates.

> The value `interim` indicates, that the issuing party asserts the content is unlikely to change.

Author: @sthagen: This looks like the same definition as `final`. I would suggest the following:
```suggestion
The value `interim` indicates, that the issuing party asserts the content of the current version is unlikely to change. However, further updates of this advisory are already planned.
```

Author: @santosomar, @mprpic, @tolim: Are you okay with the change?

Reviewer 2: "Content is unlikely to change" and "advisory is planned to be updated" kind of seem like opposite statements. I'm actually not sure what the purpose of the "interim" status is. Either the advisory is in draft and may change, or it's in its final form and is ready for consumption. As a consumer, I'm not sure I would care about a third state when even the "final" state does not mean the content won't ever change again (that's what revision history is for).

Reviewer: I would think of amending an already present content with additional content or measures? But here better practitioners having to produce the incremental versions do speak up.

Author: This is now tracked as #226. The solution will be probably part of one of the next editor revisions.

    not_contacted
    open

Each status is mutually exclusive - only one status is valid for a particular vulnerability at a particular time. As the vulnerability ages, a party’s involvement could move from state to state. However, in many cases, a document producer may choose not to issue CSAF documents at each state, or simply omit this element altogether. It is recommended, however, that vendors that issue CSAF documents indicating an open or in-progress Involvement should eventually expect to issue a document as `disputed` or `completed`.

> The two vulnerability involvement status states, `contact_accepted` and `not_contacted` are intended for use by document producers other than vendors (such as research or coordinating entities).

The value `completed` indicates that the vendor asserts that investigation of the vulnerability is complete. No additional information, fixes, or documentation from the vendor about the vulnerability should be expected to be released.

> The value `contact_accepted` indicates that the document producer attempted to contact the affected vendor.

Reviewer 3: Should this value be `contact_attempted`? I also changed the description so that it is more neutral. Please also change line 1725 and the schema.
```suggestion
The value `contact_attempted` indicates that the document producer attempted to contact the party, but did not get a response yet.
```

Reviewer: Fixed by edits on the branch

> The value `disputed` indicates that the vendor disputes the vulnerability report in its entirety. Vendors should indicate this status when they believe that a vulnerability report regarding their product is completely inaccurate (that there is no real underlying security vulnerability) or that the technical issue being reported has no security implications.

Reviewer 3: It is unclear to me how this value should be used. I would assume that `disputed` in the context of the party means, that the named party and its affiliation to the vulnerability is disputed (and not the vulnerability report in its entirety).
If there is no security implication, the vulnerability CVSS score would indicate this by a value of 0.
Is there any case, where the value `disputed` would be used? At least from a vendor perspective, this value will never be useful as disputed or non-responding parties will not be mentioned in the advisory.

Reviewer: Defining categories in deeply nested structures sometimes makes us miss the forrest for the trees - I will read CVRF v1.2 again to see how we did there. Thanks for bringing this scope / use question up @tolim

Author: This is now tracked as #220. The solution will be probably part of one of the next editor revisions.

> The value `in_progress` indicates that some hotfixes, permanent fixes, mitigations, workarounds, or patches may have been made available by the vendor, but more information or fixes may be released in the future. The use of this status by a vendor indicates that future information from the vendor about the vulnerability is to be expected.

Reviewer 3: On first sight, value `in_progress` clashes with `product_status`->`under_investigation`. On second sight, I also see the use case of 3rd party organizations providing a CSAF document for a critical vulnerability and summarizing the state of the different vendors that are potentially affected. Is this the case? If yes, this use case should be explained.

Reviewer: I understood the latter as the use case, where the reporting party may have no active role in the investigation. But, I may be wrong.

Author: This is now tracked as #221. The solution will be probably part of one of the next editor revisions.

Thus, for security reasons, CSAF producers and consumers SHALL adhere to the following:
* CSAF producers SHALL NOT emit messages that contain HTML, even though all variants of Markdown permit it.
* Deeply nested markup can cause a stack overflow in the Markdown processor [GFMENG]. To reduce this risk, CSAF consumers SHALL use a Markdown processor that is hardened against such attacks.
  **Note**: One example is the GitHub fork of the `cmark` Markdown processor [GFMCMARK].
* To reduce the risk posed by possibly malicious CSAF files that do contain arbitrary HTML (including, for example, javascript: links), CSAF consumers SHALL either disable HTML processing (for example, by using an option such as the --safe option in the cmark Markdown processor) or run the resulting HTML through an HTML sanitizer.
CSAF consumers that are not prepared to deal with the security implications of formatted messages SHALL NOT attempt to render them and SHALL instead fall back to the corresponding plain text messages.

# 5 Conformance

In the only subsection of this section, the conformance targets and clauses are listed.

> The clauses matching the targets one to one, are listed in separate sub-subsections of the targets listing subsection.

Author: I would add a comma here to support the reader:
```suggestion
The clauses, matching the targets one to one, are listed in separate sub-subsections of the targets listing subsection.
```

We could also use a different wording:
```suggestion
The clauses which match the targets one to one, are listed in separate sub-subsections of the targets listing subsection.
```
```

Reviewer: I am OK with both variants.

* **CSAF consumer**: A program that reads and interprets a CSAF document.
* **CSAF viewer**: A CSAF consumer that reads a CSAF document, displays a list of the results it contains, and allows an end user to view each result in the context of the artifact in which it occurs.
* **CSAF management system**: A program that is able to manage CSAF documents and is able to display their details as required by CSAF viewer.
* **CSAF asset matching system**: A program that connects to or is an asset database and is able to manage CSAF documents as required by CSAF management system as well as matching them to assets of the asset database.

### 5.1.1 Conformance Clause 1: CSAF document

A text file satisfies the "CSAF document" conformance profile if the text file:

* conforms to the syntax and semantics defined in section 3.

### 5.1.2 Conformance Clause 2: CSAF producer

A program satisfies the "CSAF producer" conformance profile if the program:

* produces output in the CSAF format, according to the semantics defined in section 3.

> * satisfies those normative requirements in section 3 that are designated as applying to CSAF producers.

Author: We should add an additional point in regards to the file name.

Reviewer: A producer pushing JSON documents per JSON text sequences as pure data (stream) will not need a file name nor will it be able to state one. Regardless of that, it should be a conforming producer. Or did I miss the context of the suggestion?

Author: After thinking about your comment, I realized that this might be the wrong place for this suggestion. I'll draft a PR with a detailed suggestion and link it here.

> Under investigation (`under_investigation`) of value type Products (`products_t`) represents that it is not known yet whether this version is or is not affected by the vulnerability. However, it is still under investigation - the result will be provided in a later release of the document.

Reviewer 3: Small change to adapt wording to previous properties:
```suggestion
Under investigation (`under_investigation`) of value type Products (`products_t`) represents that it is not known yet whether these versions are or are not affected by the vulnerability. However, it is still under investigation - the result will be provided in a later release of the document.
```

#### 3.2.3.9 Vulnerabilities Property - References

> References (`references`) have value type References (`references_t`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
References (`references`) of value type References (`references_t`) holds a list of related external references.
```

Author: This might be misleading as we also allow the type `self`.

Author: This is now tracked in #223. The solution will be probably part of one of the next editor revisions.

Type of the threat (`type`) of value type `string` and `enum` categorizes the threat according to the rules of the specification.
Valid values are:

    exploit_status
    impact
    target_set

> The value `exploit_status` indicates, that the `details` field contains a description of the degree to which an exploit for the vulnerability is known. This knowledge can range from information privately held among a very small group to an issue that has been described to the public at a major conference or is being widely exploited globally. For consistency and simplicity, this section can be a mirror image of the CVSS "Exploitability" metric. However, it can also contain a more contextual status, such as "Weaponized" or "Functioning Code".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value `exploit_status` indicates that the `details` field contains a description of the degree to which an exploit for the vulnerability is known. This knowledge can range from information privately held among a very small group to an issue that has been described to the public at a major conference or is being widely exploited globally. For consistency and simplicity, this section can be a mirror image of the CVSS "Exploitability" metric. However, it can also contain a more contextual status, such as "Weaponized" or "Functioning Code".
```

> The value `exploit_status` indicates, that the `details` field contains an assessment of the impact on the user or the target set if the vulnerability is successfully exploited. If applicable, for consistency and simplicity, this section can be a textual summary of the three CVSS impact metrics. These metrics measure how a vulnerability detracts from the three core security properties of an information system: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability.

Author: This should be `impact`.
```suggestion
The value `impact` indicates, that the `details` field contains an assessment of the impact on the user or the target set if the vulnerability is successfully exploited. If applicable, for consistency and simplicity, this section can be a textual summary of the three CVSS impact metrics. These metrics measure how a vulnerability detracts from the three core security properties of an information system: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability.
```

> The value `exploit_status` indicates, that the `details` field contains an assessment of the impact on the user or the target set if the vulnerability is successfully exploited. If applicable, for consistency and simplicity, this section can be a textual summary of the three CVSS impact metrics. These metrics measure how a vulnerability detracts from the three core security properties of an information system: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value `impact` indicates that the `details` field contains an assessment of the impact on the user or the target set if the vulnerability is successfully exploited. If applicable, for consistency and simplicity, this section can be a textual summary of the three CVSS impact metrics. These metrics measure how a vulnerability detracts from the three core security properties of an information system: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability.
```

Reviewer: Dine in another edit maybe having crossed your review time. Thanks.

> The value `target_set` indicates, that the `details` field a description of the currently known victim population in whatever terms are appropriate. Such terms may include: operating system platform, types of products, user segments, and geographic distribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value `target_set` indicates that the `details` field contains a description of the currently known victim population in whatever terms are appropriate. Such terms may include: operating system platform, types of products, user segments, and geographic distribution.
```

* CSAF producers SHALL NOT emit messages that contain HTML, even though all variants of Markdown permit it.
* Deeply nested markup can cause a stack overflow in the Markdown processor [GFMENG]. To reduce this risk, CSAF consumers SHALL use a Markdown processor that is hardened against such attacks.
  **Note**: One example is the GitHub fork of the `cmark` Markdown processor [GFMCMARK].
* To reduce the risk posed by possibly malicious CSAF files that do contain arbitrary HTML (including, for example, javascript: links), CSAF consumers SHALL either disable HTML processing (for example, by using an option such as the --safe option in the cmark Markdown processor) or run the resulting HTML through an HTML sanitizer.
CSAF consumers that are not prepared to deal with the security implications of formatted messages SHALL NOT attempt to render them and SHALL instead fall back to the corresponding plain text messages.

# 5 Conformance

In the only subsection of this section, the conformance targets and clauses are listed.
The clauses matching the targets one to one, are listed in separate sub-subsections of the targets listing subsection.

Informative Comments:

> >The order in which targets, and their corresponding clauses appear is somewhat arbitrarily as there is no natural order on such diverse roles participating in the document exchanging ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>The order in which targets, and their corresponding clauses appear is somewhat arbitrary as there is no natural order on such diverse roles participating in the document exchanging ecosystem.
```

>

> >Except for the target **CSAF document** all other 12 targets span a taxonomy of the complex CSAF ecosystems existing in and between diverse security advisory generating, sharing, and consuming communities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>Except for the target **CSAF document**, all other 12 targets span a taxonomy of the complex CSAF ecosystems existing in and between diverse security advisory generating, sharing, and consuming communities.
```

>
>In any case, there are no capabilities organized in increasing quality levels for targets because the security advisory sharing communities follow the chain link model.
>Instead, a single minimum capability level for every target is given to maintain important goals of providing a common framework for security advisories:

> >* Fast production, sharing, and actionable consummation of security advisories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>* Fast production, sharing, and actionable consumption of security advisories
```

> >* Consistent end to end automation through collaborating and not competing "actors"

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what "competing actors" refers to in this context?

Reviewer: Maybe collaborating is good on its own.

>* Clear baseline across the communities per this specification

> >* Additional per community cooperative extensions which may flow back into future updates of this specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>* Additional per-community cooperative extensions which may flow back into future updates of this specification
```

            // ...
          }
        }
```

The property CVSS v2 (`cvss_v2`) holding a CVSS v2.0 value abiding by the schema at [https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v2.0.json](https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v2.0.json).

> The property CVSS v3 (`cvss_v3`) holding a CVSS v3.x value abiding by one of the schemes at [https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.0.json](https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.0.json) or [https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.1.json](https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.1.json).

Reviewer 3: Improve wording:
```suggestion
The property CVSS v3 (`cvss_v3`) holding a CVSS v3.x value abiding by one of the schemas at [https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.0.json](https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.0.json) or [https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.1.json](https://www.first.org/cvss/cvss-v3.1.json).

* does not emit any objects, properties, or values which, according to section 5, are intended to be produced only by CSAF translators.
* satisfies the normative requirements given below.

The resulting modified document:

* does not have the same `/document/tracking/id` as the original document. The modified document can use a completely new `/document/tracking/id` or compute one by appending the original `/document/tracking/id` as a suffix after an ID from the naming scheme of the issuer of the modified version. It should not use the original `/document/tracking/id` as a prefix.
* includes a reference to the original advisory as first element of the array `/document/references[]`.

### 5.1.9 Conformance Clause 9: CSAF translator

A program satisfies the "CSAF translator" conformance profile if the program fulfills the two following groups of requirements:

The program:

* satisfies the "CSAF post-processor" conformance profile.
* translates at least one value.
* preserves the same semantics and form across translations.
* satisfies the normative requirements given below and does not add or remove other elements than required below.

The resulting translated document:

> * has not the same `/document/tracking/id` as the original document. The translated document can use a completely new `/document/tracking/id` or compute one by using the original `/document/tracking/id` as a prefix and add an ID from the naming scheme of the issuer of the translated version. It should not use the original `/document/tracking/id` as a suffix. If an issuer uses an CSAF translator to publish his advisories in multiple languages he may use the combination of original `/document/tracking/id` and translated `/document/lang` as a `/document/tracking/id` for the translated document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* does not use the same `/document/tracking/id` as the original document. The translated document can use a completely new `/document/tracking/id` or compute one by using the original `/document/tracking/id` as a prefix and adding an ID from the naming scheme of the issuer of the translated version. It should not use the original `/document/tracking/id` as a suffix. If an issuer uses a CSAF translator to publish his advisories in multiple languages they may use the combination of the original `/document/tracking/id` and translated `/document/lang` as a `/document/tracking/id` for the translated document.
```

* provides the `/document/lang` property with a value matching the language of the translation.
* provides the `/document/source_lang` to contain the language of the original document (and should only be set by CSAF translators).
* includes a reference to the original advisory as first element of the array `/document/references[]`.

> * may contain translations for elements in arrays of `references_t` after the first element. However, it must keep the original urls as references at the end.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* may contain translations for elements in arrays of `references_t` after the first element. However, it must keep the original URLs as references at the end.
```

  * filter on all properties which it is required to search for
  * sort on all properties which it is required to search for
  * sort on CVSS scores and `/document/aggregate_severity/text`
* identifies the latest version of CSAF documents with the same `/document/tracking/id`.
* is able to show the difference between 2 versions of a CSAF document with the same `/document/tracking/id`.

### 5.1.13 Conformance Clause 13: CSAF asset matching system

A CSAF asset matching system satisfies the "CSAF asset matching system" conformance profile if the asset matching system:

* satisfies the "CSAF management system" conformance profile.
* is an asset database or connects to one.
* matches the CSAF documents within the system to the respective assets. This might be done with a probability which gives the end user the chance to broaden or narrow the results.
* provides for each product of the asset database a list of matched advisories.
* provides for each asset of the asset database a list of matched advisories.
* provides for each CSAF document a list of matched product of the asset database.
* provides for each CSAF document a list of matched asset of the asset database.

> * provides for each vulnerability within a CSAF document the option to mark matched asset of the asset database as "not remediated", "remediation in progress", "remediation done". A switch to mark all at once may be implemented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* provides for each vulnerability within a CSAF document the option to mark a matched asset in the asset database as "not remediated", "remediation in progress", or "remediation done". A switch to mark all assets at once may be implemented.
```
